---
title: "Data Scientists have arrived"
date: 2018-01-28
tags: [economics, data science, opinion]
header:
  image: "/images/perceptron/percept.jpg"
excerpt: "Welcome to DSLand"
mathjax: "true"
---

As my first post, I'd like to just point out that Data Scientists are now officially in the [BLS's statistics](https://www.bls.gov/oes/current/oes152098.htm). It will be interesting to track the development of wages in this field. We all know that Data Scientists have the hottest job of the 21st century and all, but there are a number of really tough headwinds facing them going forward.

Let's imagine that the field of data science is a country that was founded, based on ideals of open source code, reproducibility, diversity, working from home, and right to ping pong tables at work. Its the wild west here: wide open plains, youtube tutorials for everything you need, pip install younameit, xx.

There are several types of citizen in DSLand.

_Elites_: CS degree from Stanford, probably TA'ing some computer vision class, have whimsical personal websites and resumes b/c they can, , etc. These are our future overlords. For the elites, they will thrive in this new world. They will spend 5 years at Google or so, then develop their own product and sell it back to Google and become angel investors and focus on mindfulness.

_Natives_: Probably did a CS degree but didn't really do machine learning, but who started out reprogramming their Gameboys at age five or whatever, maybe they do web stuff. But these guys and gals learn languages quickly and just need to spend a bit of time on an Andrew Ng course to move freely in DSLand. The natives will suffer varying fates: the fierce DBA's will be forced onto ever shrinking territory, and the web tribe will thrive but ultimately also succumb to the elites. They are still safe for now.

_Immigrants_: Ah yes, I count myself in their number. These are earnest hard-working folk, stuck in a stale field or job, or still using Matlab or STATA or Excel and longing to make their workday shorter, change jobs, or whatever. For me, I found myself in the feudal field of Economics, without a pass into the guild. So I too scrabbled some savings in a knapsack and boarded the slow boat called MOOC's to the new world. Immigrants will need to leverage their unique knowledge about their home country and the savvy to get on here. Mostly they will love the open source software, but they have to advance quickly: auto-ML and other such tools are coming fast. Some will use their skills and advance into the gentry of DSLand, presenting at a local conference/meetup, maybe contributing to some well-known OS projects, or settling in the pastoral Product Manager territories. Others will land in the tenement housing projects of data analysis or SAS programming and never leave.  

_Dreamers_: The youngest of our citizens. Not children of the elite, but likely young earnest first generation immigrants (i.e. not natives). They studied business or economics or biology and they want to get into the new field. They're bright-eyed and ready to learn, but they have no chance against the elites. These kids are in danger. Because the infrastructure around DS has developed so well, there is less need for having data analysts or other such low-value but high exposure roles. This was traditionally how these dreamers, by dint of their youth, could scrabble their way into even the upper gentry or low-born elites before their days are cut short by children and adulthood to master totally new skills. But now a Data Scientist is much more self-sufficient given the power of the tools available.

One common threat for all but the elites, which might seem like a gift at first, is the true uptake of working from home. It may seem like a dream now, and it is, but if you can work from home or from Bali, why not just hire someone from Bali at a fraction of the price. Take a look at the prices for jobs on Upwork if you want to see a scary future. A final threat to especially those Dreamers but everyone is a prolonged economic downturn. ML is great, but it takes a long time to pay off unless you've already paid down your infrastructure debt. Data Scientists may be the first to suffer from the pogroms of scarcity.

The main thing I want to say is that the future is far from certain. If you're an immigrant, don't neglect your home skills -- you may need to return. For dreamers, you'll need to keep moving fast if you want to stay here.
